---
title: Print version information in Haskell programs
author: Stefan Klinger <https://stefan-klinger.de/>
---

The task
========

The compiled binary must provide the following information:

  * The version number it was assigned in the cabal file.

  * The git hash that represents the latest commit before compilation,
    including “dirtiness”.  Maybe add the commit's date in the future.

  * The time the binary was compiled.

Collect the interface to this information in a common module
[`Compiletime.Info`][1].


The struggle
============

Compilation time
----------------

The easiest one is compilation time.  Using Template Haskell, the
current time can easily be [calculated][2] at compile time, and then
[spliced][3] into the program.


The version number from the cabal file
--------------------------------------

This can be accessed by the magic (and largely undocumented) API
provided in an autogenerated module named [`Paths_…`][4]

Building my application around RIO, I was hoping to get along without
depending on `base` at all.  Well, o.k., I'd accept `Setup.hs` to
depend on `base`, assuming this is code running in a pre-compilation
situation and has little to do with the inner workings of my program.

But the `Paths_…` module thwarts that plan

    module Paths_versionInfo ( … ) where

    import qualified Control.Exception as Exception
    import Data.Version (Version(..))
    import System.Environment (getEnv)
    import Prelude

and that is code compiled into the resulting binary.  I can live with
it, but it's not extra cool, is it?


The git hash, oh my
-------------------

Wait, there's a package for it: [gitrev][5] — but that just [don't cut
the mustard][6].

Obviously, if the git repository is not available at compile time,
then there's a problem.  This is a legit scenario though, I might want
to publish the source without revealing my history of fallacies and
transgressions.

Basicaly, asking for a git hash introduces a dependency on the SCM,
which is not nice to have, but a burden.  And consequently, Cabal
makes this problem obvious when *installing* a program that uses
[gitrev][6]: The build happens in a temporary directory (not
containing the `.git` subdirectory that was available during
*building*), and thus reaching out to `git` fails.  gitrev just puts
`UNKNOWN` where the hash should be.

But still, I think it is legit to ask what commit a binary (or source
distribution) was created from.

I've resorted to creating a `gitinfo` file to convey the hash into the
source distribution file used for `cabal install` and also for
shipping.

Using this file is easy, see [Compiletime.Templates][7], and
[Compiletime.Info][8].  But its creation is ugly, [`Setup.hs`][9]
always tries to write a new `gitinfo` file, or fails silently.


Conclusion
==========

Conceptually, I see two phases at work here.  The first is the step
from the cloned git repository to the source distribution directory,
and the second is the actual compilation.

Taking a more general perspective, there are two sorts of generated
files:

 1. Files not present in your source *repository*, that have to be
    present in a source *distribution*.

    The information in the `gitinfo` file would fall in that category,
    but also any modules or data used by the product, which I want to
    ship to the customer without shipping its means of creation, be it
    out of embarassment, practicality or legal necessity.

    Call these files **early generated**, because they have to be
    generated before `cabal sdist`.

 2. Files that can be created during comiplation, from information in
    the source distribution alone.

    This category is the “classical” compile-time generated stuff,
    e.g. compilation time, but also the `Paths_…` module, and other
    precomputed data used by the product whose computation cannot be
    done at source distribution.

    Call these files **late generated**, because they can be generated
    after `cabal sdist`.

Obviously, there may be generated files that would fit into either
category, trading source distribution size for compile time duration.

From this perspective, the generation of `Paths_…` is only a special
case of the *late generated* files.  Left to the developer (i.e., not
generated by Cabal), one could avoid the `base` dependency during
compilation.

I do not see Cabal's [user interface][11] providing a clear line
between these two phases.  It is probably there, somewhere, but I
can't put my finger on it.  Maybe I just did not find it in the
documentation.


Currently remaining pain
------------------------

  * Now there's another file lying around.  What's the right place and
    name to put it?

  * Current writing and parsing of `gitinfo` is is error prone and
    introduces a lot of boilerplate code.  This can probably be solved
    by generating a Haskell source file instead of `gitinfo`.

  * The package is reported to be broken:

        $ cabal check
        Warning: These warnings may cause trouble when distributing the package:
        Warning: In 'extra-source-files': the pattern 'gitinfo' does not match any
        files.

    but a `cabal sdist` will fix this.

  * I had to write my own [`Setup.hs`](Setup.hs), with a rather
    unsatisfying heuristic to always overwrite `./gitinfo` if `.git`
    was present, and to hope it contained the right value otherwise.
    A more sane approach would be Cabal providing *early* and *late*
    generation hooks as outlined above.

  * After cloning from git, it is now mandatory to `cabal build`
    before `cabal install`, otherwise

        cabal: filepath wildcard 'gitinfo' does not match any files.

    But installation from a source distribution tarball is fine,
    because it now contains `gitinfo`.

  * This approach bears some complexity.

  * I don't like `Paths_…` pulling in `base`.


[1]: src/Compiletime/Info.hs
[2]: src/Compiletime/Templates.hs#L7-L11
[3]: src/Compiletime/Info.hs#L12-L13
[4]: src/Compiletime/Info.hs#L15-L16
[5]: https://www.stackage.org/haddock/lts-18.2/gitrev-1.3.1/Development-GitRev.html
[6]: https://github.com/acfoltzer/gitrev/issues/23
[7]: src/Compiletime/Templates.hs#L13-L14
[8]: src/Compiletime/Info.hs#L18-L19
[9]: Setup.hs#L12-L29
[10]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Cabal-3.4.0.0/docs/Distribution-Simple.html
[11]: https://cabal.readthedocs.io/en/3.4/index.html
